feat: add collector resiliency doc (#6870)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/collector/resiliency.md

---
title: Resiliency
description: How to configure a resilient OTel Collector pipeline
---

The OpenTelemetry Collector is designed with components and configurations to
minimize data loss during telemetry processing and exporting. However,
understanding the potential scenarios where data loss can occur and how to
mitigate them is crucial for a resilient observability pipeline.

> ## Understanding Collector Resilience

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Understanding Collector Resilience
```

Apply sentence casing to all headings (except when a proper noun is used). Thanks!

The Collector's resilience primarily revolves around how it handles data when
the configured endpoint (the destination for traces, metrics, or logs) becomes
unavailable or when the Collector instance itself experiences issues like

> crashes.

Reviewer: Could we reformulate this a bit to describe what we mean by resilience? For example, is it fair to say that a resilient Collector is one that reduces data loss and crashes under stress or high load? It might be more relatable that way.

Author: I added the following prior to this paragraph:

> A resilient Collector maintains telemetry data flow and processing capabilities
> even when facing adverse conditions, ensuring the overall observability pipeline
> remains functional.

> ## Internal Queues (In-Memory Buffering)

Reviewer: I'd choose one and mention the other in the para.

The most basic form of resilience built into the Collector's exporters is the

> **sending queue**.

Reviewer: We generally only use bold for UI strings and similar. Please remove all instances or consider using subheadings for each of the items (in title casing, too).

- **How it works:** When an exporter is configured, it usually includes a
  sending queue that buffers data in memory before sending it to the downstream
  endpoint. If the endpoint is available, data passes through quickly.

> - **Handling Endpoint Unavailability:** If the endpoint becomes unavailable
>   (e.g., network issues, backend restart), the exporter cannot send data
>   immediately. Instead of dropping the data, it adds it to the in-memory sending
>   queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Handling Endpoint Unavailability:** If the endpoint becomes unavailable,
  for example due to network issues or a backend restart, the exporter cannot
  send data   immediately. Instead of dropping the data, it adds it to the
  in-memory sending queue.
```

    data keeps arriving, the queue can fill up. Once the queue is full, incoming
    data is dropped to prevent the Collector from running out of memory.
  - **Retry Timeout:** If the endpoint remains unavailable for longer than the
    configured maximum retry duration (default 5 minutes), the Collector will
    stop retrying for the oldest data in the queue and drop it.
- **Configuration:** You can configure the queue size and retry behavior within
  the exporter settings:

  ```yaml
  exporters:
    otlp:
      endpoint: otlp.example.com:4317
      sending_queue:
        storage: file_storage
        queue_size: 5_000 # Increase queue size (default 1000)
      retry_on_failure:
        initial_interval: 5s
        max_interval: 30s
        max_elapsed_time: 10m # Increase max retry time (default 300s)
  ```

- **Recommendation:** Enable sending queues for any exporter sending data over a
  network. Adjust `queue_size` and `max_elapsed_time` based on expected data
  volume, available Collector memory, and acceptable downtime for the endpoint.
  Monitor queue metrics (`otelcol_exporter_queue_size`,
  `otelcol_exporter_queue_capacity`).

> ## Persistent Storage (Write-Ahead Log - WAL)

Reviewer: Same as above.

  the data from the WAL and resumes attempts to send it to the endpoint.
- **Data Loss Scenario:** Data loss can still occur if the disk fails or runs
  out of space, or if the endpoint remains unavailable beyond the retry limits
  even after the Collector restarts. Guarantees might not be as strong as
  dedicated message queues.
- **Configuration:**

  1.  Define the `file_storage` extension.
  2.  Reference the storage ID in the exporter's `sending_queue` configuration.

  ```yaml
  extensions:
    file_storage: # Define the extension instance
      directory: /var/lib/otelcol/storage # Choose a persistent directory

  exporters:
    otlp:
      endpoint: otlp.example.com:4317
      sending_queue:
        storage: file_storage # Reference the storage extension instance

  service:
    extensions: [file_storage] # Enable the extension in the service pipeline
    pipelines:
      traces:
        receivers: [otlp]
        exporters: [otlp]
  ```

- **Recommendation:** Use persistent storage for critical Collectors (like
  Gateway instances or Agents collecting crucial data) where data loss due to
  Collector crashes is unacceptable. Ensure the chosen directory has sufficient

>   disk space and appropriate permissions.

Reviewer: Use a callout here, without the word Recommendation:

```
{{% alert title="Tip: Draft status" %}}

...

{{% /alert %}}
```

> ## Message Queues (e.g., Kafka)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Message queues
```

For the highest level of resilience, especially between different Collector

> tiers (like Agent -> Gateway) or between your infrastructure and a vendor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tiers (like Agent to Gateway) or between your infrastructure and a vendor
```

backend, you can introduce a dedicated message queue like Kafka.

> - **How it works:** One Collector instance (e.g., Agent) exports data to a Kafka

Reviewer: Rewrite e.g. (Latinism) to read like "for example,..."

- **Configuration:**

  - _Agent Collector Config (Producer):_

    ```yaml
    exporters:
      kafka:
        brokers: ['kafka-broker1:9092', 'kafka-broker2:9092']
        topic: otlp_traces

    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:

    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          exporters: [kafka]
    ```

  - _Gateway Collector Config (Consumer):_

    ```yaml
    receivers:
      kafka:
        brokers: ['kafka-broker1:9092', 'kafka-broker2:9092']
        topic: otlp_traces
        initial_offset: earliest # Process backlog

    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: otlp.example.com:4317
        # Consider queue/retry for exporting *from* Gateway to Backend

    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [kafka]
          exporters: [otlp]
    ```

- **Recommendation:** Use a message queue for critical data paths requiring high
  durability, especially across network boundaries (e.g., between data centers,
  availability zones, or to a cloud vendor). This approach leverages the robust,
  built-in resilience of systems like Kafka but adds operational complexity and

>   requires expertise in managing the message queue system.

Reviewer: Also a tip callout / alert.

> ## Summary: When Does the Collector Lose Data?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Circumstances of data loss
```

Data loss can occur under these circumstances:

1.  **Network Unavailability + Timeout:** The downstream endpoint is unavailable
    for longer than the configured `max_elapsed_time` in the `retry_on_failure`
    settings.
2.  **Network Unavailability + Queue Overflow:** The downstream endpoint is
    unavailable, and the sending queue (in-memory or persistent) fills to
    capacity before the endpoint recovers. New data is dropped.
3.  **Collector Crash (No Persistence):** The Collector instance crashes or is
    terminated, and it was only using an in-memory sending queue. Data in memory
    is lost.
4.  **Persistent Storage Failure:** The disk used by the `file_storage`
    extension fails or runs out of space.
5.  **Message Queue Failure:** The external message queue (like Kafka)
    experiences an outage or data loss event, and the producing collector
    doesn't have adequate local buffering.
6.  **Misconfiguration:** Exporters or receivers are incorrectly configured,
    preventing data flow.
7.  **Disabled Resilience:** Sending queues or retry mechanisms are explicitly
    disabled in the configuration.

## Recommendations for Preventing Data Loss

> 

Reviewer: Introduce the list: "Follow these recommendations to..."

---
title: Resiliency
description: How to configure a resilient OTel Collector pipeline
---

The OpenTelemetry Collector is designed with components and configurations to
minimize data loss during telemetry processing and exporting. However,
understanding the potential scenarios where data loss can occur and how to
mitigate them is crucial for a resilient observability pipeline.

## Understanding Collector resilience

A resilient Collector maintains telemetry data flow and processing capabilities
even when facing adverse conditions, ensuring the overall observability pipeline
remains functional.

The Collector's resilience primarily revolves around how it handles data when
the configured endpoint (the destination for traces, metrics, or logs) becomes
unavailable or when the Collector instance itself experiences issues like
crashes.

## Sending queue (in-memory buffering)

The most basic form of resilience built into the Collector's exporters is the
sending queue.

> - How it works: When an exporter is configured, it usually includes a sending

Reviewer 2: nit: You could use a [definition list](https://michelf.ca/projects/php-markdown/extra/#def-list) for this, this seems to be supported by Hugo per [this page](https://gohugo.io/configuration/markup/#extensions), although I don't if you can do nested definition lists
